List Comprehensions

Topics Covered
List Comprehensions
for loops inside comprehensions
Filtering with if
Transforming data
range()
Using built-in functions such as len()
What I Learned

This week I learned how to use list comprehensions to create new lists from existing iterables in a concise way.

I learned the basic structure:

[expression for item in iterable]

and how to add conditions:

[expression for item in iterable if condition]

I also learned that list comprehensions can both filter and transform data in a single expression.

Coding Exercises Completed

I practiced:

Generating squares of numbers.
Filtering even numbers.
Squaring odd numbers.
Finding the length of each word in a list.
Combining filtering and transformation.
Challenges I Faced

My main challenges were understanding the difference between the entire list and individual items inside the list. I also made an off-by-one mistake with range() by forgetting that its ending value is excluded.

I also initially confused:

len(word)

with:

len(length)

which helped me understand the difference between finding the length of an individual string and finding the number of items in a list.

Key Lessons
List comprehensions make simple data transformations concise.
if can be used to filter items.
The expression determines what goes into the new list.
range() excludes its stop value.
Readability is more important than making code unnecessarily short.
Biggest Mindset Shift

I learned to think about list comprehensions as:

iterate → filter → transform

Instead of immediately writing a for loop, I now ask what I'm iterating over, what I want to keep, and what I want the resulting value to be.

Backend Engineering Connection

List comprehensions will be useful when processing collections of data such as API responses, database records, and application data.

However, I also learned that a normal for loop can be better when the logic becomes complicated because maintainability matters more than writing fewer lines.

Reflection

List comprehensions initially confused me, but after several exercises I became more comfortable breaking them into their individual parts. The mistakes I made with range(), len(), and variable naming helped me understand the concept rather than simply memorizing the syntax.

I am becoming better at reasoning through Python problems before writing code, which is an important step toward becoming a strong backend engineer.